Your code history is now a tree. Instead of having a single latest snapshot, you have two: one for each branch. With a linear system, your sequential numbering system let you easily identify the latest snapshot. Now, that ability is lost.

Creating new development branches has become so simple that you’ll want to take advantage of it all the time. You’ll be creating branches for fixes to old releases, for experiments that may not pan out; indeed it becomes possible to create a new branch for every feature you begin!

But like everything good in life, there is a price to be paid. Each time you create a new snapshot, you must remember that the new snapshot becomes the latest on its branch. Without this information, switching to a new branch would become a laborious process indeed.

Every time you create a new branch you probably give it a name in your head. “This will be the Version 1.0 Maintenance Branch,” you might say. Perhaps you refer to the former linear branch as the “master” branch.

Think about this a little further, though. From the perspective of a tree, what does it mean to name a branch? Naming every snapshot that appears in the history of a branch would do the trick, but requires the storage of a potentially large amount of data. Additionally, it still wouldn’t help you efficiently locate the latest snapshot on a branch.

The least amount of information necessary to identify a branch is the location of the latest snapshot on that branch. If you need to know the list of snapshots that are part of the branch you can easily trace the parentage.

Storing the branch names is trivial. In a file named branches, stored outside of any specific snapshot, you simply list the name/snapshot pairs that represent the tips of branches. To switch to a named branch you need only look up the snapshot for the corresponding name from this file.

Because you’re only storing the latest snapshot on each branch, creating a new snapshot now contains an additional step. If the new snapshot is being created as part of a branch, the branches file must be updated so that the name of the branch becomes associated with the new snapshot. A small price to pay for the benefit.